---
layout:     post
title:      "Europe's declining importance for US pharmaceutical markets"
date:       2022-02-19 12:00:00
author:     "Matt Christian"
header-img: "img/cover.jpeg"
---
For decades foreign countries have provided the majority of new Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) manufacturing capacity for US markets. But the *location* of new overseas API manufacturing sites has evolved over time. And while US dependence on China has been steadily growing, it is actually India with the largest growth in new API capacity.

<!--more-->
# 20 years of offshoring

Over the past two decades, India has played an increasingly important role in Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) manufacturing for US markets.
In 2000, 20% of new Drug Master Files (DMFs) were for Indian manufacturers. By 2021, that figure skyrocketed to 62%. 
India and China now account for more than 86% of new DMFs, largely at the expense of European sites.
# Methodology

The Medicine Supply Map team applied Natural Language Processing (NLP) and geocoding algorithms to connect DMF holders to specific manufacturing facilities. The model accurately uncovers facility information for more than 80% of active, type II, API DMFs.

<script
  type="text/javascript"
  src="https://www.gstatic.com/charts/loader.js"
></script>
<script type="text/javascript">
  google.charts.load("current", { packages: ["corechart"] });
  google.charts.setOnLoadCallback(drawSeriesChart);

  function drawSeriesChart() {

      var data = google.visualization.arrayToDataTable([
        ['Region', 'India', 'China', 'Europe', 'US', 'Other'],
        ['2000', 34, 13, 75, 26, 22],
        ['2010', 259, 73, 78, 28, 49],
        ['2021', 307, 118, 35, 17, 17],
      ]);

      var options = {
        title: "Geographic evolution of new pharmaceutical manufacturing capacity",
        legend: { position: 'bottom', maxLines: 3 },
        vAxis: {
          minValue: 0,
          ticks: [0, .25, .5, .75, 1],
          title: 'Portion of new DMFs by region', 
          titleTextStyle: {italic: false}
        },
        series: [
          {color:'#ec9332'},
          {color:'#c44129'},
          {color:'#3e8410'},
          {color:'#0560bd'},
          {color:'#D3D3D3', visibleInLegend: false},
        ],
        bar: { groupWidth: '50%' },
        isStacked: 'percent',
      };

    var chart = new google.visualization.ColumnChart(
      document.getElementById("series_chart_div")
    );
    chart.draw(data, options);
  }
</script>
<div id="series_chart_div" style="width: 900px; height: 500px"></div>

# Additional research ideas:

1. Studying therapeutic class implications
2. Evaluating the offshoring impact on drug shortage risk. Prior work has shown a negative correlation between shortage risk and geographic diversity (diversifying supply points enhances supply chain resilience).

To learn more about how geographic diversity impacts shortage risk, please visit our [website](https://www.usp.org/supply-chain/medicine-supply-map)

