---
layout:     post
title:      "Medicare Part D Markup"
date:       2022-01-13 12:00:00
author:     "Matt Christian"
header-img: "img/cover.jpeg"
---
How effectively does the US Government negotiate drug costs? It depends on the drug.

 [Part D](http://www.kaggle.com/c/seizure-prediction)
<span class="label label-danger">Market Factors</span>

<!--more-->

## Gathering the data
Benmarking is needed. 

Three publicly available datasets provide pricing information on more than 42% of drug products sold in the United States.
1. National Average Drug Acquisition Cost (NADAC). Based on a weekly survey of pharmacies, this dataset covers over 29% of all drug products sold in the United States. While AWP (Average Wholesale Price) represents a published price for the drug based on data from manufacturers, NADAC reflects actual monthly purchasing trends from transacted data.
2. Medicare Part B. The smallest of the three datasets covers certain outpatient medications.
3. Medicare Part D. This dataset is focused on prescription drugs and has substantial overlap with the NADAC data.

## Benchmarking other datasets
To compare the relative prices between datasets, we can focus on overlapping NDC groups. NADAC and Part D have 2,751 NDC groups in common. The scatter plot below shows the subset of NDC groups below $10/unit. The iso-cost line in red represents equal pricing between NADAC and Part D. As we can see, more drugs fall above the red line, meaning Part D generally has higher unit prices for the same NDC groups.

{% include image.html url="/img/compare.PNG" description="Isocost curve" %}

The "markup" of Part D drug prices, compared to NADAC, is most extreme for lower priced medicines. The figure below shows the average Part D markup for a drug costing more than $10/unit is 8%. As drugs become less expensive, the average Part D markup increases significantly. Drugs costing less than $1/unit show the greatest pricing inequality. Part D prices for these drugs are 3x more expensive than NADAC on average.

{% include image.html url="/img/markup.PNG" description="Histogram of prices" %}

## Useful background material
1. https://www.kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/whats-the-latest-on-medicare-drug-price-negotiations/


To learn more about how drug pricing impacts shortage risk, please visit our website